feat(updates): adds 'Steps to Break Up a Terralith' post (#46)
masterpointio/masterpoint.io: content/updates/steps-to-break-up-a-terralith.md

In our previous article, [“What Is a Terralith?”](https://masterpoint.io/updates/terralith-monolithic-terraform-architecture/), we explored the challenges associated with Terraliths and why it’s beneficial to break them into smaller, manageable pieces.

In this guide, we’ll walk you through the steps to break up a Terralith, helping you improve your infrastructure’s maintainability, and overall performance.

## Why Is It a Problem?

The Terralith anti-pattern is insidious. It might not cause immediate disruptions, but that single root module grows behind the scenes. Eventually, it snowballs into a significant challenge that hits hard when you least expect it. The longer you wait to address it, the more complex and time-consuming the solution becomes.

Let’s take a look at the typical symptoms of a Terralith:

> - **Large state file(s)**: A large number of resources are stuffed into a single `.tfstate` state file. There’s no universally correct file size or resource count for TF. However, our experience suggests that **between 30 and 100 resources per state file** is the range that strikes a good balance between optimal performance and manageability. Ideally, your TF root modules around service boundaries that share the same lifecycle, allowing for easy division.

Reviewer: I'm genuinely worried about the pushback on this line. People are going to freak out and hate this I think. Mind if we change this?

```suggestion
- **Large state file(s)**: A large number of resources are stuffed into a single `.tfstate` state file. There’s no universally correct file size or resource count for TF. However, our experience suggests that **if your state files have between a few hundred and 1000+ resources** then you're likely dealing with performance and manageability issues. Not all APIs are the same, so that might not be the case for you, but we're painting with a broad brush here to give you an idea. Ideally, your TF root modules are built around service boundaries that share the same lifecycle, allowing for easy division.
```

Author: Dan's suggestion was to give some specific numbers, that's why we have this line. Considering recent talks about Terralliths... I agree with you here.
I think it's a great addition about the APIs btw 👍

- Using [`graph`](https://opentofu.org/docs/cli/commands/graph/): This command generates a dependency graph you can visualize to see how resources interconnect.
- Temporarily commenting out resources: Another quick approach is to comment out a resource and run `plan` to see if there are errors indicating dependencies still linked to that resource.
- Checking TF state: Running `state list` can help confirm which resources are managed, then cross-reference them with your code to see where outputs or data sources might be consumed.

### State Management

Plan how you’ll manage multiple state files and keep them consistent. The organization of these files may differ based on your needs. We recommend storing your TF state in a reliable cloud storage solution. For example, on AWS, use an S3 bucket in the root or shared-services account as your backend, with DynamoDB for state locking. This solution offers versioning, encryption and enforces access control using IAM. A resource to help you set up state management on S3 is the open-source child module [cloudposse/terraform-aws-tfstate-backend](https://github.com/cloudposse/terraform-aws-tfstate-backend).

> We explore this topic in detail in our blog post on [why cloud object storage is the best option for a Terraform remote state and backend](https://masterpoint.io/updates/why-use-cloud-object-storage-terraform-remote-backend/).

Reviewer: Well done on adding this in! 👏

### #1 Confirm a Clean Plan

Before making any changes:

- Run `terraform plan` or `tofu plan` against your Terralith root module to ensure there are no pending additions, modifications, or deletions.
- If you don't have a clean plan, **stop now**. Resolve any drift between your configuration and the actual state. This is important to do now so you can accurately validate if the breakup of your Terralith introduced any changes to your IaC or underlying infrastructure when the migration is complete.

### #2 Create a Backup

Always keep backups of your Terraform state files before doing any large-scale operations. Use `state pull` command to retrieve the current state and pipe it into a file. For example:
```sh
tofu state pull > $(date +%F)-terraform-state-backup.tfstate
```

This command saves your state to a timestamped file. Remember to store your backups in a secure location!

### #3 Create New Module Structures

- For each new root module that you plan to introduce, create a separate directory.
- Move the relevant resource configurations from the Terralith into the new root modules.
- Initialize each new root module to ensure the backend is configured correctly.

> ### #4 Inter-Module Communication (if any)

Reviewer: All other headers are actions, staying consistent. 

```suggestion
### #4 Implement Inter-Module Communication (if any)
```

For example, instead of retrieving subnets from a “network” module via [terraform_remote_state](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/hashicorp/terraform/latest/docs/data-sources/remote_state), you can use the AWS data source for subnets when provisioning a “database” module. This approach reduces coupling, keeps modules more autonomous, and ensures that changes in one module (like adding a subnet) don’t break another. Plus, any orchestration tool can trigger each root module independently, letting them fetch the latest infrastructure details directly from AWS without inter-module dependency on state files.

### #5 Move Resources to The New State

There are several ways to migrate the resources to their new state files depending on your TF version, the providers in use, and the data you must supply for imports.

- **Option 1: Declarative Migrations Using TF 1.5+**

  This is our preferred method. The idea here is to use declarative TF blocks to import resources into the new root modules state and then declaratively remove them from the old state.

  **Importing existing resources**

>   In newer versions of TF, you can define [import](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/import) blocks to move resources between modules in a declarative fashion. This method preserves resource history in Git and is more transparent and less error-prone than the alternative of manual state manipulation. This block is idempotent - once a resource is successfully imported, subsequent runs won’t trigger the same import action as long as that resource remains in that particular state file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  In newer versions of TF, you can define [import](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/import) blocks to import resources into state in a declarative fashion. This method preserves resource history in Git and is more transparent and less error-prone than the alternative of manual state manipulation. This block is idempotent - once a resource is successfully imported, subsequent runs won’t trigger the same import action as long as that resource remains in that particular state file.
```

  You can place `import` blocks in a separate file `imports.tf` in your new root module and then remove it after completing the migration.

  While the import functionality is great, it gets even better. With Terraform or OpenTofu v1.7 or later, you can import several resources by iterating over a map or a set. Below is a sample configuration demonstrating how to use an import block with `for_each` for multiple GitHub repositories.

  ```hcl
  locals {
    # Define a list of repository names to import
    repos = {

>       "repo-foo": { description = “Our repo foo” },
>       "repo-bar": { description = “Our repo bar” },

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      "repo-foo": { description = "Our repo foo" },
      "repo-bar": { description = "Our repo bar" },
```

Author: Doh, I forgot that we've discussed this. Thanks for the fixing!

  To remove them from the code, simply delete the `resource` of `module` blocks from the Terralith root module that you imported into the new root module.

  To remove them from the state, utilize the [`removed`](https://opentofu.org/docs/language/resources/syntax/#removing-resources) block. When released, this was a highly anticipated feature that complements the `import` block, enabling fully declarative state removal operations. By adding it to your Terralith root module, you tell TF to remove specific resources (or modules with multiple resources) from its state without destroying the actual infrastructure objects. Once added, an `apply` will remove the specified blocks from the state file.

  ```hcl
  removed {
    # No need to specify instance keys such as `module.github_repos["foo"]`
    from = module.github_repos
  }
  ```

  Once the new root module manages the existing resources and they have been successfully removed from the Terralith codebase and state file, the migration of those resources is complete.

  **Are there any caveats?**

  Yes! Keep the following in mind:

>   - **Provider limitations**: Not all providers or resources fully support import blocks. In some cases, you may need to rely on command-line operations or scripting (see the example script below).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **Provider limitations**: Not all providers or resources fully support importing. In some cases, you may need to rely on command-line operations or scripting (see the example script below).
```

Author: Yeah, this is important!

```hcl
locals {
  # Define a list of repository names to import
  repos = {
    "repo-foo": { description = “Our repo foo” },
    "repo-bar": { description = “Our repo bar” },
  }
}

resource "github_repository" "default" {
  # Create one github_repository resource for each entry in local.repository_names
  for_each = local.repos

  name        = each.key
  description = "${each.value.description}. Managed by Terraform"
  visibility  = "private"
}

import {
  # Loop over the same list of repository names
  for_each = local.repos

  # Link each repository name to the corresponding github_repository instance
  to = github_repository.default[each.key]

  # Use the repository name (string) as the ID to import
  # Docs: https://registry.terraform.io/providers/integrations/github/latest/docs/resources/repository#import
  id = each.key
}
```

**Removing resources from your configuration (with Terraform/OpenTofu 1.7 or later)**

Even though we're importing the resources into the new root module’s state, that does not mean our Terralith will stop managing them. To finalize the migration, we need to remove the imported resources both from the code and from the state file.

> To remove them from the code, simply delete the `resource` of `module` blocks from the Terralith root module that you imported into the new root module.

Author: It's not a typo. In this case, we can delete either a resource or a module block.
